Transcript of Response:

I like reading biography books the most, there’re two reasons for it. First, uh, we can learn some pretty good 
productivity hacks from these books. Like I have read about Jerry Seinfeld where he uses the Seinfeld strategy, which is 
to at least write something daily, be it good, bad, but he used to write daily. Uh, second reason would be, you can find 
the right motivation. Um, like, as in the case when things are going down south for you, you can keep pushing for your 
dreams, you can keep on pursuing it, and, things will do go right, like in the case of Google founders, um, Larry Page 
and Sergey Brin—they were rejected by Yahoo, uh, but now they are successful. Google is a very successful company.

Rater Comments:

This is an example of a high-level response. In the beginning of the response, Sarthak clearly states his preference for 
biographies, and then goes on to explain why he likes biographies so much. His first reason is that you can learn from 
biographies by seeing how other people do things. His second reason is that biographies can provide their readers with 
motivation. He explains that the founders of Google were successful even after facing rejection, though it is not 
completely clear how this has motivated Sarthak (or if he learned about it in a biography). This response would be even 
more full and complete if Sarthak provided a clearer explanation of how biographies personally motivate him. In terms of 
the delivery of the response, Sarthak has a noticeable accent, but he speaks clearly and his accent does not make it 
difficult for listeners to understand him. He effectively uses some idiomatic phrases, such as, “productivity hacks” and 
“when things are going down south for you.” While there are some minor errors (“second reason would be,” instead of “the 
second reason would be,” and “things will do go right,” instead of “things will go all right”), the response is overall 
very clear and mostly complete.

Transcript of Mid-level Response:

I think adventure books more enjoyable than other books, because, uh, other books generally based on, uh, only one topic or
 only one event, but adventure books has lots of events and topics, uh, so I think adventure books more fluently and 
enjoyable than other books when I, uh, reading, uh, adventure books, uh, I can’t understand how I spent my time. Uh, it is
so fast for me.

Rater Comments:

Nihal O.’s response is mid-level. She does a good job of clearly stating which type of books she enjoys the most 
(adventure books) and starts to explain why she likes these books, but parts of her explanation are somewhat unclear. 
For example, when talking about how enjoyable these books are, she says, “when I, uh, reading, uh, adventure books, uh, 
I can’t understand how I spent my time. Uh, it is so fast for me.” A more effective way of expressing this idea would be 
to say, “When I’m reading adventure books, time goes by so quickly. I’m so focused on what I’m reading that I lose track 
of time.” Grammatically, this response has room for improvement, such as changing “adventure books more enjoyable than 
other books,” to “adventure books are more enjoyable than other books,” or saying “adventure books have lots of events” 
instead of “adventure books has lots of events.” Nihal speaks with some hesitations and pauses, but her pronunciation is 
mostly clear. To improve this response, she could provide clearer explanations for her ideas and try to pause less frequent
ly in between words and phrases.

Let's Review:

Below are points that are important to include when answering Question 2, followed by sample responses and comments from 
real TOEFL raters. If you need to review Question 2, go to the bottom of the page.

Important Points:

When you answer this item, you should say whether you agree or disagree that making mistakes is one of the best ways to 
learn, and then explain why you think that. You can choose either point of view, and you will not be scored based on 
which choice you make. The content of your response will be evaluated based on how well you support your opinion and 
explain your ideas. If you agree that making mistakes is one of the best ways to learn, you should use specific examples 
to explain why making mistakes is a good way to learn or can help people learn. If you disagree with the statement, you 
should provide at least one reason or example to explain why making mistakes is not a good way to learn.  

Actual Test Taker Responses:
Listen to a high-level response from a real test taker.

Transcript of High-level Sample Response:

The statement if one of the best ways to learn, uh, by making mistakes, it’s, can be, um, can be discussed controversially
 but I personally think that the statement is complicate because, um, it is definitely one of the best ways to learn if 
you do mistakes yourself. I personally, uh, tried, uh, to, um, apply once for a consulting job and, uh, I made the mistake
 to not inform myself about the company and so I came to, um, to the assessment center and didn’t know anything so it was 
a great mistake, uh, performed by me and so afterwards I wouldn’t do this mistake again. So if I apply the next time, I 
will be, uh, prepared in a, in a correct manner.

Rater Comments:

This is an example of a high-level response. The speaker gives a full, clear response after struggling at the beginning. 
His first sentence is confusing, but he is then able to provide a solid response. He makes a couple of grammatical and 
word choice errors (“the statement is complicate” instead of “the statement is complicated” and “I wouldn’t do this mistake
 again” instead of “I wouldn’t make this mistake again”), but the message is clear and these minor errors do not interfere
 with his meaning. Because the speaker states his stance about the statement and provides a clear personal example, this 
response is easy to understand and the speaker’s stance is well justified. His delivery is also very clear, and no words or
 phrases are difficult to understand.

Transcript of Mid-level Sample Response:

In my opinion, I totally agree with this statement. That learning by making mistakes is the one of the best ways, because 
a couple of reasons. For instance, when I was a high school students, uh, I always try to get a high degree in my math 
class. But at that time I really didn’t know about to how to resolve the every questions. So I tried the several ways even
 though I mistakes a lot of the time and I had to spend a lot of time to get the correct answer but after doing that, I, 
right now I couldn’t find the correct way and very easy and fast and the study guidelines so I can get the grade, the high
 grade.

Rater Comments:

This is an example of a mid-level response. The speaker has a rather strong accent, but is for the most part still relative
ly easy to understand, and he provides a sustained response. He starts off strong by stating his opinion (that he agrees 
with the statement), and attempting to provide an example of a personal experience in order to explain why he agrees. The 
example is somewhat unclear, however, and it isn’t obvious how making mistakes helped him learn math. Near the end of the 
explanation, he says, “right now I couldn’t find the correct way,” which is confusing since it sounded like he was talking
 about how he learned to improve in math (a listener would expect him to say something like, “Now I can always find the 
correct way to solve a problem.”). The response has some grammatical and vocabulary issues as well, such as extra articles
 (“how to resolve the every questions” and “I tried the several ways” instead of “I tried several ways”) and some confusing
 sentences (“I always try to get a high degree in my math class” instead of “I always tried to do well/get a high grade in 
math classes”). 

Transcript of Response:

The newsletter suggest that, uh, students should, uh, be allowed to eat in class for two reasons. First of all, uh, eating
 in class may help students concentrate better, uh, because, uh, after a long class they can be very hungry. And the second
 reason is that, uh, they can have, uh, they can party at the end of the semester. However the man disagree with this. Uh, 
he, uh, gives two reasons. The first one, uh, is that, uh, he, uh, it’s maybe true that we can concentrate while we eat, 
but we will disrupt other because of the noise that we make while we are eating. And, uh, the second one is that, um, at 
the end of the semester, uh, more, most class will use that for reviewing for the exams, so using that time would not, uh,
 be appropriate and we will less prepare.

Rater Comments:

This is an example of a mid-level response. Vu Anh covers the main points from the student letter and the conversation 
between the students, though some important details are missing. His explanation of the proposal is clear, as is his 
explanation about why eating in class might help some students concentrate but be distracting for other students. His 
discussion of the point about having parties is somewhat unclear, however, since he doesn’t explain that the man is against
 having parties during class time—Vu Anh says, “using that time would not be appropriate,” but does not explain what he 
means by this or how this is connected to class parties. A clearer way Vu Anh could express this could be to say, “He 
doesn’t think using class time for parties is appropriate because students need that time to review for exams.” Vu Anh’s 
pronunciation is at times slightly difficult to understand and his pace is a bit slow with noticeable “uhs,” but overall 
the response is comprehensible. The response could be clearer with more variation in the grammatical structures used; for 
example, “we will less prepare,” would be more effective as “students would be less prepared.” Vu Anh makes some minor 
agreement errors (“the newsletter suggest,” “the man disagree,” “most class”), but is also able to effectively produce 
extended speech.

Listen to Khrystyna’s high-level response.


Transcript of High-level Response:

The main point that I read in this letter was the student was complaining about the, um, that the food is not allowed at 
the classes because the classes tend to be pretty long and the people can, like students can be hungry and this is like, 
prevents concentration, you can’t concentrate when you’re hungry and the other opinion that you can’t you know like do the
 end-of-semester parties but the student at the conversation, I, is against it, uh, because, um, for the one person who’s 
eating it helps to concentrate, but for the other who hear like this munching and chewing sound it can be pretty 
distracting and I do agree with this. Um, and the classes that are at the end of the semester are very important so those 
parties are not necessarily in the crucial at the end of the year so that’s like those two guys’, students’ opinion. 

Rater Comments:

Khrystyna gives a high-level response. She does not explicitly state the proposal (that Nancy thinks eating should be allow
ed in class), but she implicitly communicates this by explaining that the letter-writer is complaining about food not being
 allowed in class, and she also includes the reasons why the person who wrote the letter thinks this is bad 
(“can’t concentrate when you’re hungry” and “you can’t you know like do the end-of-semester parties”). She then clearly 
states that the student in the conversation disagrees, along with his reasons for disagreeing. Some of the phrases 
Khrystyna uses sound a bit unnatural due to her use of prepositions (for example, she says, “not allowed at the classes,” 
instead of “not allowed in the classes,” “the student at the conversation” instead of “the student in the conversation,” 
and “not necessarily in the crucial” instead of “not necessarily crucial”), but these errors do not make the response 
difficult to understand. Khrystyna makes good use of time and uses intonation effectively in order to emphasize certain 
points (for example, her emphasis on “pretty” when she says, “the classes tend to be pretty long”).

Transcript of High-level Sample Response:

Well, in this case, uh, the man, uh, had, uh, he always dreamed about being a, a repor—a film reviewer, however he original
ly did not get that job so he was forced to be a, a journalist. Um, after years he got the option to be, um, a film 
reviewer, uh, he had that opportunity, but he was already, he was used to, to being, uh, working as a, in the news as a 
journalist, so that was his comfort zone. He was very familiar in a familiar setting he was, he knew his job so, uh, he, 
he didn’t want to take new risks so he decided to stay in his job as a, as a journalist and he did not, uh, take his dream
job just because he preferred to stay, uh, within his comfort zone.

Rater Comments:

This is an example of a high-level response. The speaker approached the response a little differently than the method 
described in the Important Points, since he implicitly explained the concept of the comfort zone bias throughout his 
response, rather than starting the response with a definition of the concept. Even though the speaker never used the phrase
 “comfort zone bias,” he clearly explained the concept through the example of the journalist, explaining that the 
ournalist “was used to … working as a journalist … that was his comfort zone,” and “didn’t want to take new risks … he did
 not take his dream job just because he preferred to stay within his comfort zone.” The speaker’s clear delivery, 
including effective use of intonation, as well as effective use of vocabulary, make this response very clear and easy to 
understand.

Transcript of Mid-level Sample Response:

Um, the subject is, uh, when man decide, uh, make a, make a decision, uh, they tend to make a decision familiar with, uh, 
him or comfortable for him rather than new situation. Um, in the lecture, uh, the professor said, uh, explain some example
 that his friend is working as a news reporter but, uh, his dream is to be film reviewer. Finally he, he, he’s going to get
 a new job as a film reviewer, uh, and that and, uh, if he, he, he is a, uh, he become film reviewer he can be pay, pay 
more but he refuse.

Rater Comments:

This is an example of a mid-level response. In this response, the speaker starts by attempting to define the concept of the
 comfort zone bias. He is able to use some key vocabulary from the reading passage as he talks about decision making, the 
familiar/comfortable, and new situations. This definition is somewhat vague, however, likely because the speaker did not 
use a variety of grammatical structures to convey his meaning. For example, the phrase, “they tend to make a decision 
familiar with him … rather than new situation” contains some key information but is unclear. A more effective way to say 
this would have been, “they tend to make decisions that allow them to stay in a familiar or comfortable situation, rather 
than trying out a new situation.” The speaker’s summary of the example in the lecture contains some important points but is
cut short, partially because of the speaker’s slow pace and frequent pauses between words and phrases. This speaker would 
probably be able to produce a more complete response if he were able to comfortably use a variety of grammatical structures
and speak more quickly and fluidly (with fewer pauses).

NOTE:

So here's generally what question 2 will look like.
For this task, you are presented with a question,
and you have 30 minutes to type your response at the computer.
There is no maximum length for your essay,
but a good response is usually at least 300 words.
So, what is the question asking you to do?
The independent writing question
will ask your opinion on an issue,
so often you will get a question such as:
Do you agree or disagree?
Which would you prefer?
or Do you support or oppose this idea?
Regardless of the question,
you will be expected to use specific reasons and examples
to support your answer.
Let's look at some sample topics.
Number 
1.Do you agree or disagree with the following statement?
A teacher's ability to relate well with students
is more important than excellent knowledge of the subject being taught.

2.Some people like to travel with a companion.
Other people prefer to travel alone.
Which do you prefer?

3.It has recently been announced that a new restaurant may be built in your neighborhood.
Do you support or oppose this plan?

FOLLOW:
One way to approach your essay is to make an outline.
Here's how you might make an outline to answer the question
about traveling alone or with a companion.
First, decide which option you prefer.
Let's say you prefer to travel with a companion.

Then, think of the main reasons why you have that preference,
such as, it's safer, it's more fun, and it makes travel easier.
Then list some specific examples for each reason.
Using an organizing tool like an outline
is important when planning your essay.

Don't try to create an essay
by memorizing paragraphs on various topics before the test
and then trying to relate them to the topic you receive,
because the content won't be appropriate,
and you'll just receive a low score

MY INDEPENDENT WRITING ATTEMPT:
No one can deny the fact that comprehension is critically important to succeed in the journey of life. Nowadays, the rate of 
information that come our ways on daily basis is becoming increasingly alarming. As a student, many of us is finding it hard to 
cope with the influx of information at our disposal and I strongly agree that while studying it is greatly beneficial for one to have 
comprehensive knowledge of understanding than acquiring facts, I feel this way for a number of reasons, which I will develop in 
the subsequent paragraphs.

To begin with, when we understand the concepts of an idea, it increases our productivity at work, which in turn help one to stand 
out of that pack. I have to admit that my opinion on this matter has been greatly influenced by my personal experience. About five
years ago, while i was interning with an Electrical Servicing firm in the city. My unit worked on a project to design and implement 
an industrial wiring. During the implementation phase of the project, we ran into a problem where electricity supply to one 
section of the house failed. This problem lingered and gave my supervisor a tough time to crack but with my sound understanding 
of the basic understanding of the Current-Voltage principle that I learned in my sophomore courses. I pickup the prject design diagram and analyzed
it and was able to pin-point where the error was on the design. I was given a huge prize for solving the problem and was regarded 
as an expert in my field. If i had not devoted my time to understand the ideas and concepts of the electricity laws, I would not have been able to 
resolve the problem.
